# Today's learnings

## Purpose of database systems

As a software engineer, I can understand the necessity of databases. We use them literally everywhere from sending messages to listening to music. There are a lot of things to be considered here to maintain or design a decent enough database system. Today I've learned these purposes: <br>

### Data redundancy and consistency
Let's understand this from an example. If your favorite music artist collaborated on a song for another music artist. eg: her (feat. Annika Wells & Kaden Hawke) by JVKE. Here, we have three different artists who sang this song. Does that mean there should be 3 copies of the same song under each of these artists? No, this leads to redundancy and inconsistency. Rather, this song links to the three artists instead of storing three copies. So, while designing this needs to be taken into account. <br>

### Difficulty in accessing data
Well, from just by the title we can understand that; the data we need should be easily retrievable from the database. <br>

### Data isolation
All the data should be organized in a way that makes it easy to access together. If related data is stored in different files or formats, retrieving and combining it becomes difficult. <br>

### Integrity problems
This can be explained by an example. If you are storing your bank account, can it be negative? So, validations need to be performed before storing data. <br>

### Atomicity problems
I have dealt with atomicity multiple times. If something needs to be succeeded it should be succeeded, if not, it should revert back to its previous state. A good example is a bank transfer. If money is deducted from account and cannot be deposited into another the whole trasaction has to be rolled back. In distributed systems, when roll back isn't available compensation actions (like sage pattern) are used. <br>

### Concurrent-access anomalies
What happens when multiple people try to access the same data and modify it? For example, if 2 people at the same time try to withdraw 100 and 200 from the same account which has 1000, what will both of them see? is it 900, 800 or 700? This is a concurrency issue and to avoid this supervision is required but it is costly. So, while designing a system this needs to be taken into account. <br>

### Security problems
Each person has a role and access. They should be able to access only their data and nothing more. <br>